---
bibliography:
- 'PhDthesis2305.bib'
- 'PhDthesis2305.bib'
title: |
    Coupling between tolerance and resistance differs between related
    Eimeria parasite species: implications for coevolution with their mouse
    hosts
---

\maketitle
Abstract
========

Resistance (host capacity to reduce parasite burden) and tolerance (host
capacity to reduce impact on its health for a given parasite burden)
manifest two different lines of defenses. Tolerance can be independent
from resistance, traded-off against it, or the two can be positively
correlated because of redundancy in underlying (immune) processes. We
here tested whether closely related parasite species could show
differences in this coupling between tolerance and resistance. We tested
this in infections with two parasite species of genus *Eimeria.* We
measured proxies for resistance (the (inverse of) number of parasite
transmission stages (oocysts) per gram of feces at the day of maximal
shedding) and tolerance (the slope of maximum relative weight loss
compared to day of infection on number of oocysts per gram of feces at
the day of maximal shedding for each host strain) in four inbred mouse
strains belonging to two mouse subspecies, *Mus musculus domesticus* and
*M. m. musculus*. We found a negative correlation between resistance and
tolerance against *E. falciformis*, while the two are uncoupled against
*E. ferrisi.* We conclude that resistance and tolerance against the
first parasite species might be traded off, but evolve more
independently in different mouse genotypes against the latter. We argue
that host evolution can be studied largely irrespective of parasite
strains if coupling is absent or weak (*E. ferrisi*) but host-parasite
coevolution is more likely observable and best studied in a system with
coupled tolerance and resistance (*E. falciformis*).

**Keywords**: Resistance, Tolerance, Eimeria, Coevolution

Introduction
============

Host defence mechanisms evolve to alleviate the detrimental effect of
parasites. They can be categorised into two components: resistance and
tolerance [@raaberg_decomposing_2009]. Resistance is the ability of a
host to reduce parasite burden, resulting from defence against parasite
infection or proliferation early after infection
[@schmid-hempel_evolutionary_2013]. The negative effect of resistance on
parasite fitness can lead to antagonistic coevolution. According to
theoretical models, fluctuating host and parasite genotypes arise, and
balancing selection maintains resistance alleles polymorphic
[@Boots2008; @roy_evolutionary_2000]. Resistance has been the classical
$``$catch all$"$ measure for host-parasite systems, but recently it has
been shown to be incomplete, especially with respect to potential
fitness effects on the host
[@kutzer_maximising_2016; @raaberg_decomposing_2009].

Disease tolerance [not to be confused from \"immunological tolerance\" ,
unresponsiveness to self antigens; @medzhitov_disease_2012] is the
ability of the host to limit the impact of parasite on its fitness
[@raaberg_decomposing_2009; @Vale2012; @kutzer_maximising_2016]. By
potentially providing a longer-living niche, this defence mechanism
improves, or at least does not deteriorate, the fitness of the parasite.
Tolerance alleles are thus predicted by theoretical models to evolve to
fixation due to positive feedback loops
[@Boots2008; @restif_concurrent_2004; @roy_evolutionary_2000]. From a
mechanistic perspective tolerance alleviates direct or indirect [e.g.
excessive immune response underlying resistance against parasites,
called immunopathology; @graham_evolutionary_2005] damage caused by
parasites [@raaberg_decomposing_2009]. Tolerance mechanisms include
modulation of inflammatory response [@Ayres2012], tissue repair [stress
response, damage repair and cellular regeneration mechanisms;
@soares_disease_2017], and compensation of parasite‐induced damage by
increase of reproductive effort [@Baucom2011]. The resulting metabolic
costs of resistance and tolerance, with and without parasite infection,
determine the optimal (steady state and infection ineducable) extent and
of both immune defences [@sheldon_ecological_1996].

Resistance and tolerance can be positively associated if they involve
the same metabolic pathway, as was shown in the plant model *Arabidopsis
thaliana* in response against herbivory [@mesa_molecular_2017]. In
animals, genetic association studies of resistance and tolerance of
*Drosophila melanogaster* against the bacterium *Providencia rettgeri*
have shown positively correlated genetic effects, as the same loci were
associated with changes of both traits in the same direction
[@howick_genetic_2017].

Nevertheless, resistance and tolerance can also be genetically and
physiologically independent, involving different proximate mechanisms.
Lack of correlation between both defences was shown for example in
monarch butterflies (*Danaus plexippus*) infected by the protozoan
parasite *Ophryocystis elektroscirrha*. This study found genetic
variation in resistance between butterflies families, but a fixed
tolerance [@Lefvre2010]. Similarly, no correlation could be found
between resistance and tolerance for the fish *Leuciscus burdigalensis*
in response to infection with its parasite *Tracheliastes polycolpus*.
The authors explain the decoupling of both defences by the fact that, in
this system, tolerance likely involves wound repair rather than immune
regulation, making resistance and tolerance mechanisms independent
[@MazGuilmo2014].

Eventually, in other systems, resistance and tolerance have been found
negatively correlated. For examples, inbred laboratory mouse strains
lose weight upon infection with *Plasmodium chabaudi.* The extent of
this impact on host health is negatively correlated with the peak number
of parasites found in the blood [@raaberg_disentangling_2007], meaning
that mouse strains with higher resistance present lower tolerance.
Similarly, infections of sea trout (Salmo trutta trutta) and Atlantic
salmon (Salmo salar) with the trematode Diplostomum pseudospathaceum
showed that resistance and tolerance were negatively correlated when
assessing mean levels of both traits in different host populations
[@klemme_vertebrate_2016]. This is interpreted as a result of trade-off
between resistance and tolerance
[@sheldon_ecological_1996; @restif_concurrent_2004; @raaberg_decomposing_2009].

We have seen that resistance and tolerance can be (1) uncoupled
(independent), (2) positively correlated (involving same genes and
mechanisms), or (3) negatively correlated (traded-off). Theoretical
models show that coupling between resistance and tolerance (or absence
thereof) depends not only on the host but also on the parasite
[@Carval2010]. Here, we tested differences in the resistance-tolerance
coupling upon infection with two closely related parasite species. We
infected four inbred mouse strains representative of two house mouse
subspecies, *M. m. domesticus* and *M. m. musculus*, with three parasite
isolates representative of two naturally occuring parasite species, the
protozoan parasite *Eimeria ferrisi* and *E. falciformis*
[@jarquin-diaz_detection_2019]. *Eimeria* spp. are monoxenous parasites
that expand asexually and reproduce sexually in intestinal epithelial
cells, leading to malabsorption of nutrients, tissue damage and weight
loss [@chapman_chapter_2013]. The evolutionary history of these
different *Eimeria* species in the two house mouse subspecies is unknown
and it is unclear whether subspecies-specific adaptation exists in one
or the other. We tested (1) if coupling between resistance and tolerance
of each host differs between both parasite species; and (2) local
adaptation of *E. ferrisi* using a parasite isolated in a *M. m.
domesticus* host and one in a *M. m. musculus* host.

Material and methods
====================

Parasite isolates
-----------------

The three parasite isolates used in this study were isolated from feces
of three different *M. m. domesticus/M. m. musculus* hybrid mice
captured in Brandenburg, Germany, in 2016 (capture permit No.
2347/35/2014). The parasite isolates belong to both the most prevalent
*Eimeria* species in this area, namely *E. ferrisi* (isolates
Brandenburg64 and Brandenburg139) and *E. falciformis* (isolate
Brandenburg88)[@jarquin-diaz_detection_2019]. Isolate Brandenburg64 was
isolated in a 92$\%$ *M. m. domesticus* individual (hybrid index (HI) =
0.08; Proportion of *M. m. musculus* alleles in a set of 14 diagnostic
markers, see [@Balard2020]), isolate Brandenburg139 in a 85$\%$ *M. m.
musculus* (HI=0.85) and isolate Brandenburg88 in a 80$\%$ *M. m.
domesticus* (HI=0.2). Pre-patency and the peak day of parasite shedding
for these isolates were estimated during infection in NMRI laboratory
mice [@al-khlifeh_eimeria_2019] which were also used for serial
passaging of the isolates. Parasite infective forms (oocysts) were
recovered by flotation in saturated NaCl solution followed by washing
and observation under light microscope (following the protocol described
in [@clerc_parasitic_2019]) and stored at room temperature in 1mL of
2$\%$ potassium dichromate for a maximum of 2 months before infection of
the wild-derived mouse strains. Oocysts were allowed to sporulate 10
days before infection in a water bath at 30$^{\circ}$ C.

Mouse strains
-------------

We used four wild-derived inbred mouse strains from which four F1
strains were bred. Two parental strains represented *M. m. domesticus*:
**SCHUNT** (Locality: Schweben, Hessen, Germany \[N: 50$^{\circ}$ 26',
E: 9$^{\circ}$ 36'\] [@martincova_phenotypic_2019]) and **STRA**
(Locality: Straas, Bavaria, Germany \[N: 50$^{\circ}$ 11', E:
11$^{\circ}$ 46'\] [@pialek_development_2008], and two derived from *M.
m. musculus*: **BUSNA** (Locality: Buškovice, Bohemia, Czech Republic
\[N: 50$^{\circ}$ 14', E: 13$^{\circ}$ 22'\] [@pialek_development_2008])
and **PWD** (Locality: Kunratice, Bohemia, Czech Republic \[N:
50$^{\circ}$ 01', E: 14$^{\circ}$ 29'\] [@gregorova_pwdph_2000]). The
four F1 strains consisted of two intrasubspecific hybrids
(**STRA-SCHUNT** and **BUSNA-PWD**) and two intersubspecific hybrids
(**BUSNA-STRA** and **PWD-SCHUNT**)(**Figure 3.1**). Age of the mice at
the time of infection ranged between 5.6 and 21.4 weeks. All mouse
strains were obtained from the Institute of Vertebrate Biology of the
Czech Academy of Sciences in Studenec (licence number
61974/2017‐MZE‐17214; for further details on strains see
[[https://housemice.cz/]{style="color: 00000A"}[en](https://housemice.cz/en)](https://housemice.cz/en)).

Parasites of the *Eimeria* genus are known to induce host immune
protection against reinfection [@rose_immune_1992; @smith_genetic_2000].
To ensure that our mice were *Eimeria*-naive, mice fecal samples were
tested before infection for the presence of *Eimeria* spp. oocysts, by
flotation in saturated NaCl solution followed by washing and observation
under light microscope.

Experimental infection
----------------------

Mice were kept in individual cages during infection. Water and food
(SNIFF, Rat/Mouse maintenance feed 10 mm) were provided *ad libitum*
supplemented with 1 g of sunflower and barley seeds per day. Mice were
orally infected with 150 sporulated oocysts of one *Eimeria* isolate
suspended in 100 $\mu$ l phosphate-buffer saline (PBS) and monitored
daily until their sacrifice by cervical dislocation after infection
(reduction of oocyst output). Individuals presenting severe health
deficiency and/or a weight loss approaching 18$\%$ relative to their
starting weight were sacrificed earlier at defined humane end points
(experiment license Reg. 0431/17). Weight was recorded and feces
collected on a daily basis. Fecal pellets were collected every day from
each individual cage and suspended in 2$\%$ potassium dichromate.
Parasite oocysts were recovered using NaCl flotation (see above).

All individuals were negative for *Eimeria* at the beginning of our
experiment (before infection of first batch, as described in the next
paragraph). In total, 168 mice were infected. Mice were randomly
allocated to experimental groups ensuring homogeneous distribution of
ages and sexes between groups. Our experiments were conducted in four
(partially overlapping) consecutive batches for logistical reasons. The
first two batches were infected with the two *E. ferrisi* isolates
(Brandenburg64 and Brandenburg139), the third and fourth by one
*E. ferrisi* isolate (Brandenburg64) and one *E. falciformis* isolate
(Brandenburg88). Our experimental design is summarized in **Table 3.1**
(chronology of experimental batches can be scrutinized in
**Supplementary Table S3.1**).

Nematode eggs were observed in flotated feces of mice belonging to all
genotypes before the experiment. Nematode infection is common in
breeding facilities (Baker, 1998). Despite treatment of the first
infection batch of mice (B1, 22 mice) with anthelminthics (Profender®,
Bayer AG, Levekusen, Germany) following the protocole of Mehlhorn et al.
(2005), nematodes were still detected with PCR (following the protocole
of [@floyd_nematode-specific_2005]) in randomly sampled fecal samples a
week later. We therefore decided not to treat mice of the following
infection batches. Moreover, we observed *Eimeria* oocysts in the feces
of 28 mice belonging to the last experimental batch (batch B4) at the
day of infection, likely due to cross-contamination between batches. For
following statistical analyses, we considered along with the full data
set (N=168) a conservative data set in which cross-contaminated animals
and animals treated by anthelminthic were removed (N=118). Results
obtained on the conservative data set can be found in **Supplementary
Material S3.2**. Despite differences in significance due to a lower
statistical power, the main conclusions of our analyses were consistent
with those obtained on the main data set.

Statistical analyses
--------------------

### Choice of proxies for resistance, impact of parasite on host and tolerance

As resistance is the capacity of a host to reduce its parasite burden,
it is usually estimated by the inverse of infection intensity
[@raaberg_decomposing_2009]. Pre-patency (the time to shedding of
infectious stages, so called oocysts) is longer for *E. falciformis* (7
days) than for *E. ferrisi* (5 days) [@al-khlifeh_eimeria_2019].
Therefore, as a proxy of (inverse of) resistance we used the number of
oocysts per gram of feces (OPG) at the day of maximal shedding. Using
the Spearman's non-parametric rank correlation test, we found this
measurement to be tightly correlated with the sum of oocysts shed
throughout the experiment (Spearman's rho, $\rho$ =0.93, *n*=168,
P\<0.001). Due to the aggregation characteristic of parasites
[@shaw_patterns_1995], the appropriate distribution for maximum number
of OPG was found to be the negative binomial distribution. This was
confirmed based on log likelihood, AIC criteria and goodness-of-fits
plots (density, CDF, Q-Q, P-P plots; R packages MASS
[@venables_modern_2002] and fitdistrplus
[@delignette-muller_fitdistrplus_2015]).

Both parasite species provoke inflammation, cellular infiltration,
enteric lesions, diarrhea, and ultimately weight loss
[@ankrom_life_1975; @ehret_dual_2017; @schito_comparison_1996; @al-khlifeh_eimeria_2019].
Therefore, the impact of parasites on host health was measured as the
maximum relative weight loss compared to day 0 (body weight measured at
the start of the experimental infection). For mice sacrificed at humane
end points before the end of the experiment, last weight of the living
animal was used. This weight (loss) can be expected to be a very
conservative estimate for our analyses (rendering tolerance
conservatively low for these animals, which might have lost more weight
if not sacrificed).

Tolerance is usually defined as a reaction norm, i.e. the regression
slope of host fitness (or health condition if that is the parameter of
interest) on infection intensity per genotype
[@Simms2000; @raaberg_decomposing_2009]. Thus tolerance was assessed as
the slope of maximum relative weight loss compared to day 0 on number of
OPG at the day of maximal shedding, within each mouse strain and for
each parasite isolate. A steep slope indicates a low tolerance (high
weight lost for a given parasite burden).

### Statistical modelling

Maximum OPG and relative weight loss were modelled separately as a
response of either mouse strain, parasite isolate and their interaction.
We used a negative binomial generalised linear model for maximum OPG,
and a linear model for relative weight loss. For tolerance, we performed
a linear regression with null intercept (as each mouse was controlled
against itself at start of the experiment, before losing weight or
shedding parasite), modelling relative weight loss as a response of
maximum OPG interacting either mouse strain, parasite isolate and their
interaction. To test the significance of the marginal contribution to
each parameter to the full model, each parameter was removed from the
full model, and the difference between full model and sub-model was
assessed using likelihood ratio tests (G).

For each of our model, we also asked within each infection group if the
response differed between mouse genotypes (i.e. variable $``$mouse
strain$"$ significant) using likelihood ratio tests (G) as described
above. Of note, four mice infected by *E. falciformis* isolate
Brandenburg88 did not shed any oocysts as death occurred at or one day
before the peak of oocysts shedding in other mice. For this reason, we
modelled maximum OPG in this infection group using a zero-inflated
negative binomial (ZINB) generalised linear model, after verifying that
it provided a better fit than the simple negative binomial based on log
likelihood and AIC criteria.

### Test of local adaptation

Local adaptation of *E. ferrisi* was tested using two isolates (the
$``$Western$"$ Brandenburg64 and $``$Eastern$"$ Brandenburg139) and our
four F0 mouse strains (the two *M. m. domesticus* Western SCHUNT and
STRA, and the two *M. m. musculus* Eastern BUSNA and PWD). We
hypothesised a possible local adaptation of *E. ferrisi*, i.e. (1) a
higher parasite fitness in sympatric than in allopatric host, or (2) a
higher host fitness when infected with sympatric than allopatric
parasite [@Kaltz1998]. The prediction drawn from (1) would be that the
Eastern parasite (*E. ferrisi* isolate Brandenburg139) reproduces better
in the matching Eastern mouse subspecies (*M. m. musculus*) than in the
allopatric one (*M. m. musculus*), and similarly the Western parasite
(*E. ferrisi* isolate Brandenburg64) should reproduce better in *M. m.
domesticus* than in *M. m. musculus.* According to hypothesis (2), a
higher tolerance of each host infected by its matching parasite despite
similar parasite reproductive output could indicate increased host
fitness, and host local adaptation.

### Test of coupling between resistance and tolerance

We tested coupling between resistance and tolerance for *E. ferrisi* and
*E. falciformis* using the isolates Brandenburg64 and Brandenburg88 and
our eight mouse strains. To test such coupling, one can assess the
strength of correlation between measure of resistance and measure of
tolerance [@raaberg_disentangling_2007]. Of note, tolerance (in absolute
value) is measured as the slope $\alpha$ of the linear regression of
parasite load (x) on maximum relative weight loss (y) of equation y =
$\alpha$ x + $\beta$ ($\alpha$ being the slope and $\beta$ the
intercept, 0 in our case). Therefore, tolerance is expressed as $\alpha$
= y/x -- $\beta$ . As x and y/x are by definition not independent,
testing the correlation between resistance and tolerance can lead to
spurious correlation [@Brett2004]. To alleviate the dangers of this
statistical artifact, we additionally tested differences in resistance,
impact on health and tolerance between mouse strains separately and also
the underlying correlation between mean parasite load (x) and mean
relative weight loss (y). We use the terminology $``$coupling$"$
(between resistance and tolerance) to describe genotype-level
correlation between tolerance and resistance additionally supported by
the absence of positive correlation between health-effect and
resistance. Correlations were tested using Spearman's rank correlation.

All analyses were performed using R version 3.5.2 [@R_2010](negative
binomial: function glm.nb from R package MASS [@venables_modern_2002];
ZIBN: function zeroinfl from R package pscl
[@Jackman2020; @Zeileis2008]; linear model: function lm from R core
package stats; mean and 95$\%$ confidence intervals: function ggpredict
from R package ggeffect [@Ldecke2018]). Graphics were prod[uced using
the R package ggplot2 [@wickham_ggplot2_2016] and compiled using the
free software inkscape ([https://inkscape.org](https://inkscape.org/)).
Code and data used for this article can be found at:
<https://github.com/alicebalard/Article_RelatedParasitesResTol>]{style="color: 00000A"}

Results
=======

General
-------

Parasites of all isolates successfully infected all mouse strains (at
the exception of 5 individuals infected by *E. falciformis* isolate
Brandenburg88 that died or had to be sacrificed due to a strong weight
loss before the peak of shedding for this parasite), meaning that no
\"qualitative infection resistance\" (*sensu* [@Gandon2000]) was
detected. For *E. ferrisi* (both isolates Brandenburg139 and
Brandenburg64), the pre-patent period was 5 dpi and the median day of
maximal oocyst shedding was 6 dpi (standard deviation sd=0.7 and 0.9,
respectively). The median day of maximum weight loss was 5 dpi for both
isolates (sd=2.1 and 1.7 respectively). For *E. falciformis* (isolate
Brandenburg88) pre-patency was 7 dpi, median day of maximal shedding was
8 dpi (sd=1.3) and median day of maximal weight loss 9 dpi
(sd=1.6)(**Figure 3.2**). Of note a considerable number of mice infected
with this isolate (13 out of 56 = 23$\%$ ) died or had to be sacrificed
at humane end points less than 3 days after the oocysts shedding peak
for the group, all belonging to *M. m. musculus* subspecies (PWD, BUSNA,
or their F1 PWD-BUSNA; 5 died at dpi 8, 5 at dpi 9, 3 at dpi 10).
*E. falciformis* isolate Brandenburg88 was more lethal for the *M. m.
musculus* mice strains than for the other strains ($\chi_{7}^{2}$=
31.96, P\<0.001; **Table 3.2**).

No indication of local adaptation of *E. ferrisi*
-------------------------------------------------

We tested if our proxies for resistance, impact on weight and tolerance
were different between the four parental mouse strains and between both
*E. ferrisi* infection group (isolate Brandenburg64 and Brandenburg139).
Maximum parasite load differed between mouse strains (LRT: G=25.5, df=6,
P\<0.001), but the interaction term mouse strain-parasite isolate was
non significant (LRT: G=4.1, df=3, P=0.25). A similar result was found
for maximum relative weight loss (LRT: mouse strain: G=16.8, df=6,
P=0.01; interaction mouse strain-parasite isolate: G=4.1, df=3, P=0.25).
This indicates that when resistance and impact on weight vary between
host strains, they do so independently of the parasite isolate.
Eventually, the variables mouse strain, parasite isolate and their
interaction were found non significant at the 0.05 threshold for the
slope of the linear regression between the two, indicating that
differences of tolerance could not be detected between mouse strains or
parasite isolates (**Figure 3.3**). Our results do not indicate either
(1) an increased reproduction of each parasite in its matching host or
(2) a higher tolerance of host infected by its matching parasite despite
similar parasite reproductive output. Thus they do not support the
hypothesis of local adaptation between *E. ferrisi* and its host.

Resistance and tolerance to *E. ferrisi* isolate Brandenburg64 are uncoupled
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

We tested coupling between resistance and tolerance for *E. ferrisi*
isolate Brandenburg64 in our eight mouse strains. First, we tested
whether our proxies for resistance, impact on weight and tolerance were
different between the four mouse strains. We found the maximum number of
OPG and relative weight loss to be statistically different between mouse
strains (LRT: maximum number of OPG: G=26.6, df=7, P\<0.001; **Figure
3.4A**; maximum relative weight loss: G=21.5, df=7, P\<0.01; **Figure
3.4B**). Tolerance was not found to significantly differ between mouse
strains for this parasite isolate (LRT: G=6.8, df=7, P=0.45; **Figure
3.4C**).

We found a non significant positive correlation between resistance
(inverse of maximum number of OPG) and impact on health (maximum weight
loss) (Spearman's rho=0.69, P=0.07, N=8; **Figure 3.4D**). Eventually,
we did not find a correlation between resistance (inverse of maximum
number of OPG) and tolerance (inverse of slope of maximum weight loss on
maximum OPG) (Spearman's rho=0, P=1, N=8; **Figure 3.4E**).

In conclusion, we did not find indications of resistance-tolerance
coupling for *E. ferrisi* isolate Brandenburg64, the different mouse
strains infected by this parasite presenting a similar level of
tolerance while showing an effect of quantitative resistance on health.

Coupling between resistance and tolerance to *E. falciformis*
-------------------------------------------------------------

We then tested coupling between resistance and tolerance for
*E. falciformis* isolate Brandenburg88 in our eight mouse strains.
First, we tested if our proxies for resistance, impact on weight and
tolerance were different between the four mouse strains. We found the
maximum number of OPG and relative weight loss to be statistically
different between mouse strains (LRT: maximum number of OPG: G=28.6,
df=14, P=0.012; **Figure 3.5A**; maximum relative weight loss: G=21,
df=7, P\<0.01; **Figure 3.5B**). Finally, contrary to our results on
*E. ferrisi* isolate Brandenburg64, the tolerance slopes for
*E. falciformis* isolate Brandenburg88 were different between mouse
strains (LRT: G=13.9, df=7, P=0.05; **Figure 3.5C**).

We detected a strong negative correlation between (inverse of)
resistance (maximum number of OPG) and tolerance (inverse of slope of
maximum weight loss on maximum OPG) (Spearman's rank correlation:
rho=-0.95, P=0.001; **Figure 3.5E**). We conclude that this correlation
is unlikely a statistical artifact, as (1) mouse strains present
statistically different values of resistance and tolerance and (2) we
found a (non significant) negative correlation between resistance
(inverse of maximum number of OPG) and impact on health (maximum weight
loss) (Spearman's rank correlation: rho=-0.5, P=0.22; **Figure 3.5D**),
indicating that mouse strains losing more weight also shed less
parasites.

We conclude that our results indicate the presence of negative
resistance-tolerance coupling for *E. falciformis* isolate
Brandenburg88.

Discussion
==========

In this study, we assessed resistance and tolerance to two closely
related parasites, *E. ferrisi* (two isolates) and *E. falciformis* (one
isolate), in eight different inbred strains. Understanding this coupling
has two major implications.

From a practical \"measurement\" perspective we can ask whether
tolerance can be predicted from resistance, as the latter is easier to
measure (e.g. in field sampling). Many studies assess the impact of
parasites on host fitness based on resistance. If, as we found in the
present study, resistance and tolerance are decoupled this can be
missleading. In our host system, the house mice, for example, it has
been shown that hybrids between *M. m. domesticus* and *M. m. musculus*
are more resistant to parasites [@baird_where_2012], including
*Eimeria*, but tolerance could not be measured under natural conditions
[@Balard2020]. The effect of parasites on host fitness in the evolution
of the house mouse hybrid zone is thus still rather ambiguous
[@baird_shifting_2019]. We show that careful distinction between
parasite species is necessary when analysing parasite host interaction
[see also @jarquin-diaz_detection_2019] and that it is indispensable to
measure both resistance and tolerance in *Eimeria* infections of house
mice.

More generally, in a evolutionary perspective, coupling between
resistance and tolerance might determine whether coevolution between
host and parasite can be expected. As such, coevolution in host-parasite
systems is often assumed but rarely proven [@Woolhouse2002].
[@Janzen1980] notes that not all parasite-host systems are coevolving.
The presence of efficient host defenses against a given parasite is not
necessarily produced in response to this parasite specifically and the
parasite does not necessarily respond specifically. In the
mouse-*E. ferrisi* system, where resistance and tolerance are decoupled,
host and parasite fitness might be decoupled as a result, making
host-parasite coevolution less likely. In the *E. falciformis-*mouse
system we found a negative coupling between tolerance and resistance,
making coevolution between host and parasite more likely.

Intrinsic differences between parasite species could explain the
evolution of different strategies: *E. ferrisi* commits to sexual
reproduction after a relatively short time with few cycles of asexual
expansion [@al-khlifeh_eimeria_2019; @ankrom_life_1975], while
*E. falciformis* has a relatively longer life cycle
[@al-khlifeh_eimeria_2019; @haberkorn_entwicklung_1970]. As *E. ferrisi*
infections do not reach extremely high intensities, high tolerance might
be the optimal strategy for both house mouse subspecies. Resistance
could then evolve relatively freely without any major impact of the
parasite on the hosts' health. Moreover, our results did not support
local adaptation of *E. ferrisi*, which might be explained by the
absence of host-parasite coevolution caused by uncoupling of parasite
and host fitness. In the case of *E. falciformis*, the long life cycle
might lead to high tissue load. Tissue damage is observed during sexual
reproduction for this parasite [@ehret_dual_2017] and might mean that a
certain level of resistance is required. On the other hand,
immunopathology has been observed in advanced *E. falciformis*
infections [@stange_il-22_2012]. These intrinsic characteristics of
*E. falciformis* might lead to multiple different optima for resistance
and tolerance, leading to a trade-off.

In addition, we could speculate on two related alternative explanations.
Firstly, *E. falciformis* could originally be a *M. m. domesticus*
parasite dissipated into *M. m. musculus* territory by a spillover
through the hybrid zone. Secondly, the particular *E. falciformis*
isolate employed here was collected from a predominantly *M. m.
domesticus* mouse (hybrid index 0.2). The isolate could hence be locally
adapted to *M. m. domesticus*. Experiments with additional
*E. falciformis* isolates from *M. m. musculus* are needed to test
whether host subspecies adaptation can lead to high tolerance and low
resistance in matching pairs of *E. falciformis* isolates and mouse
subspecies. This seems plausible, as the coupling between resistance and
tolerance links host and parasite fitness, making coevolution and hence
local adaptation more likely. Interestingly, this parasite-host
coevolution wouldn't be antagonistic but rather mutualistic with regards
to tolerance and parasite reproduction (that is, the inverse of
resistance) [@little_coevolution_2010; @raaberg_decomposing_2009].

In conclusion, we argue that the difference between resistance and
tolerance coupling in two different parasites can guide research in our
system: if the effects of host hybridisation should be studied
independently of potential host-parasite coadaptation, the prevalent
*E. ferrisi* might be the most suitable parasite. If coevolution between
hosts and parasites should be studied, the pathogenic *E. falciformis*
is a more plausible target. Generally, the coupling between resistance
and tolerance can differ between closely related parasite species and we
argue that this trait of a host-parasite system determines the questions
to be best approached with a particular parasite.

\printbibliography
Tables
======

\centering
![**Table 3.1.** Infection experiment
design.](images/Table1_final.pdf){width="\linewidth"
height="\textheight"}

\addtocounter{figure}{-1}
\centering
![**Table 3.2.** Contingency table: number of mice and status at dpi 11
for each mouse strain upon infection with E. falciformis isolate
Brandenburg88.](images/Table2_final.pdf){width="\linewidth"
height="\textheight"}

\addtocounter{figure}{-1}
Figures
=======

\centering
![**Parasite isolates and mouse strains.** (A) Map showing locations at
which mice were collected for breeding of mouse strains and isolation of
parasites. The purple line is an estimation of the center of the house
mouse hybrid zone between M. m. domesticus and M. m. musculus based on
sampling and genotyping of mice in this area
[@Balard2020; @dureje_mouse_2012; @macholan_widespread_2019]. (B) The
eight mouse strains (parents and F1s) used in our experimental
infections.](images/Fig1_final.pdf){width="\linewidth"
height="\textheight"}

\centering
![**Parasite density (A) and relative weight (B) during *Eimeria*
infection.** Parasite density is calculated as number of oocysts
detected (in millions) per gram of feces, relative weight is calculated
as the percentage of weight compared to day 0. Mean and 95% CI are
plotted for each parasite isolate. All hosts strains are pooled
together.](images/Fig2_final.pdf){width="\linewidth"
height="\textheight"}

\centering
![**Comparison of resistance, impact on weight and tolerance between
mouse strain for both *Eimeria ferrisi* isolates.** (A) Maximum oocysts
per gram of feces used as a proxy for (inverse of) resistance; (B)
Impact on host health measured as the maximum weight loss during patent
period relative to starting weight (%); (C) Tolerance estimated by the
slope of the linear regression with null intercept modelling maximum
relative weight loss as a response of maximum oocysts per gram of feces.
A steep slope corresponds to a low tolerance. We did not detect (A)
either higher parasite shedding of the Eastern parasite isolate in
Eastern mouse strains and vice versa or (C) higher tolerance of Eastern
hosts infected by Eastern parasite isolate and vice versa, thus our
results do not support the hypothesis of local adaptation between
*E. ferrisi* and its host.](images/Fig3_final.pdf){width="\linewidth"
height="\textheight"}

\centering
![**No indication of resistance-tolerance coupling for *E. ferrisi*
isolate Brandenburg64.** Colors represent mouse subspecies (blue: *M. m.
domesticus*, red: *M. m. musculus*, purple: Mmd-Mmm). Left side:
comparison of maximum oocysts per gram of feces used as a proxy for
(inverse of) resistance (A), impact on weight measured as the maximum
weight loss during patent period relative to starting weight (B) and
tolerance between mouse strains estimated by the slope of the linear
regression with null intercept modelling maximum relative weight loss as
a response of maximum oocysts per gram of feces, a steep slope
corresponding to a low tolerance (C). Maximum number of OPG and relative
weight loss differ between mouse strains, but tolerance is similar.
Right side: non significant positive correlation between mean maximum
oocysts per gram of feces and mean relative weight loss (D) and absence
of correlation between maximum oocysts per gram of feces used as a proxy
for (inverse of) resistance and tolerance (E); Grey error bars represent
95% confidence intervals. Our results do not support coupling between
resistance and tolerance *E. ferrisi* isolate
Brandenburg64.](images/Fig4_final.pdf){width="\linewidth"
height="\textheight"}

\centering
![**Coupling between resistance and tolerance for *E. falciformis*
isolate Brandenburg88.** Colors represent mouse subspecies (blue: *M. m.
domesticus*, red: *M. m. musculus*, purple: Mmd-Mmm). Left side:
comparison of maximum oocysts per gram of feces used as a proxy for
(inverse of) resistance (A), impact on weight measured as the maximum
weight loss during patent period relative to starting weight (B) and
tolerance between mouse strains estimated by the slope of the linear
regression with null intercept modelling maximum relative weight loss as
a response of maximum oocysts per gram of feces, a steep slope
corresponding to a low tolerance (C). Maximum number of OPG, relative
weight loss and tolerance differ between mouse strains. Right side: non
significant negative correlation between mean maximum oocysts per gram
of feces and mean relative weight loss (D) and strong negative
correlation between maximum oocysts per gram of feces used as a proxy
for (inverse of) resistance and tolerance (E); Grey error bars represent
95% confidence intervals. Our results support coupling between
resistance and tolerance *E. falciformis* isolate
Brandenburg88.](images/Fig5_final.pdf){width="\linewidth"
height="\textheight"}
